we know evolution is full of accident
and contingency and we do expect on
other planets probably photosynthesis
evolves like the ability to use sunlight
I would not expect humanoids like were
going to mistake them it's like oh wow
that you know are they from Earth I
think nothing's going to be that similar
what would it look like to be able to
convey a message and communicate with
another intelligent life form
mathematics kind of has to be a
universal language because it seems sort
of built into the universe not something
we've created much is something we've
discovered to me mathematics is the
thing that gives us hope of being able
to establish that connection with some
other
[Music]
intelligence this is Star Talk Neil
degrass Tyson here your personal
astrophysicist Chuck nice with me too
Chuck how you doing man what's happening
Neil all right you a comedian also
acting yes I'm stealing
money that's all I'm just stealing money
Neil they don't even know they don't
even you make people laugh and they just
hand you their money giving me money and
I'm like you don't even know I'm just
acting like a
comedian but I'll take that
check so today Chuck we got Cosmic
queries that's a fan favorite Cosmic
queries yeah and oh my gosh one of our
favorite guests yes to help us out here
excited to have him back we got Dr Funky
spoon Dr Funky
spoon David's grinspoon longtime friend
and colleague we kind of came up
together through graduate school but we
were sort of different sides of the
fence I was sort of galaxies and
cosmology he was like planets and
asteroids and
stuff that's like the Jets and the
Sharks right
there just to put that in context right
we had a telescopes that would reach out
to the galaxies we had telescopes that
would see the planets but then they
started going to the planets is it still
astronomy if you can go there you see
this was this was part of the Divide you
go there and bring back samples and
stuff you're just a You're A lab
technician well you had to observe
first you had you had to look through
something and see it first David grinon
welcome back to Star Talk dude oh thanks
a lot it's really great to see you guys
uh it's it's a pleasure as always and
yeah that divide between uh planetary
and astrophysics it's kind of funny I
mean it is interesting how it how it
evolved historically and at times it was
kind of intense like you know when I was
in grad school in planetary science the
the astronomy Department across the
street the professors were like oh don't
go over there you know but but now that
was before exoplanets now we need each
other more than we ever knew yeah yeah
there's there's been a meeting of the
melding of the minds and hearts and
souls absolutely also our preeminent
journal the astrophysical journal the
the ordering I don't if it's it still is
this why I haven't paid attention The
Ordering of the articles in every
released issue was
in
descending order of distance from Earth
so it start out Cosmic microwave
background large scale structure the
universe Go Active and you keep doing
and way at the bottom is observations of
Saturn it it was like clearly the
prioriti prioritization of the universe
is is writ large in those pages that's
all so David I noticed you have a title
that you didn't have last time at first
you're you're an astrobiologist we get
that but you're also senior scientist
for astrobiology strategy at NASA
what is that yeah so that's that's my
new job since the last time I really had
a a good conversation with you guys I
started a new role I uh you know I've
always worked with NASA and um been
supported by NASA for my research and
and the missions that I'm involved in my
whole career but just about a year ago
uh this week I started a new job at Nasa
I am now a a Gman I work for the
government and look at that yeah and see
you'll never take me alive
CA I am now uh working at uh your nation
space agency helping to uh run the
astrobiology program and it just like it
says I'm doing astrobiology strategy so
really trying to understand and um and
uh figure out how we can expand
astrobiology in new ways and plot the
future um it's a really interesting uh
role for me it's fascinating it's very
different it's I mean I feel like my
career up to this point Was preparing me
for this in a lot of ways but it's
fundamentally very different from any
other job I've had and I it's been a
year but I feel like I'm still learning
the ropes but you don't have power over
missions do you we do that in our
decadal surveys uh so do you help shape
it after the priorities are set yeah so
I don't yeah absolutely like you say the
decal surveys which are you know these
big Community input uh exercise is to
set the priorities for the you know on a
decadal time scale just so the public
understands it's why you never see Astro
folk publicly arguing about how money
should be spent we do that among
ourselves like in private well yeah like
like any good
marriage you know what I mean so that so
that that sets like the major priorities
which we take as our foundational
document you know those are in a way our
marching orders but within that there's
a lot of decisions to be made about how
we prioritize different research uh
areas and um directions and uh you know
what we put what we emphasize and how we
communicate about what we're doing the
decal kind of defines the shape that
we're acting within but then within that
there's a lot of uh a lot of decisions
to be made and you know again it's it's
all about uh working with the community
we represent the astrobiology community
and so not like oh what ideas do I have
today about what NASA should do I'm just
going to go do it you know of course I
hopefully am interjecting my own
creativity and my own ideas but it only
works if we're really working a lot with
that community and um kind of moving too
far some come down to DC and kick your
ass well
exactly exactly you know I'm a I'm a
public servant but you know it's it's
interesting it's a different kind of
creativity before this I was doing my
own research now I'm putting a lot of
time into facilitating um other people's
research and figuring out how to
creatively get groups of people working
together in new ways and helping you
know create connections between people
that are that think they're doing
separate things but trying to get them
to see how working together the whole
can be greater than the sum of the parts
so it's it's a real new kind of um I
feel like a a tapping into a new sort of
creativity for me and that's uh so we
kind of need that and even expect it but
are you following some mission statement
that's been established for your for
your strategic plan yeah so so as you
mentioned there's the there's the decal
survey which is um you know and there's
a there's a planetary science and
astrobiology decal survey which is
different from the astrophysics decal
survey although they you know they play
well together um and then beyond that
there's actually something called the
astrobiology strategy which is a a
10-year document which is much more
detail about the research priorities and
so forth and part of what I'm doing now
a big a big part is we're we're working
on a new astrobiology strategy so we're
actually starting to Canvas the
community of astology researchers and
say hey what should our priorities be
for the next decade I solve that right
now find
life that's you know that's the that's
the Big Goal but then you know when but
give us some detail how do you want us
to do that you we're trying to fill in
the fill in the steps there here's the
funny thing that you guys are always
looking for life have you ever thought
about creating it like maybe we're the
progenitors like you know when you look
at like Prometheus it's all about like
ah you know these aliens came they left
you know some microorganisms in our
water and that made us Oh you mean
Prometheus the movie the movie not Abel
to alien just to catch people up with
your your sci-fi fluence that's my
sci-fi yes so so is it ever us maybe we
are the aliens that create and see life
elsewhere it's funny you should ask
because there are people working on um
well obviously there's there are people
working on sort of origin of Life
experiments not necessarily that they're
literally trying to create uh organisms
organisms but they're trying to recreate
the chemical steps to help us understand
how life started and that's you know
that's astrobiology supports a lot of
that kind of uh experimentation there
are people actually trying to work on
synthetic life like could we create some
kind of a life form and that you know
it's a really interesting idea we that's
certainly something how that's a Avenue
towards learning a lot about life if we
could do that just to be clear when
someone says this is made of synthetic
leather it means it's not leather it
just kind of looks and smells like
leather if you're going to say synthetic
life you're not making it out of some
ingredient that life is not made of
you're actually making life right so so
that that word synthetic it can be can
mean a few different things but there
are people me the wrong thing in P in
terms of a person's first hearing of
that pH maybe you want to say artificial
or uh you know laboratory created and
that's not that's not a major effort of
astrobiology now but it's certainly
something that some people are are
thinking about and it is very related to
this question of uh you know alien life
and and some people have predicted you
know sort of provocatively but maybe
they're right that the first alien life
that we
will discover or come to know will be
something made in a laboratory you know
and then you can say well is that really
alien it comes from Earth but it's
pretty alien in a way if we made it yes
the The Impossible meat
alien yeah exactly
what what do they call the turkey made
out of out of toer to yes to
to to
FY hey Star Talk fans I don't know if
you know this but the audio version of
the podcast actually posts a week in
advance of the video version and you can
get that in Spotify Apple podcast and
most other podcast cast Outlets that are
out there multiple ways to ingest all
that is Cosmic start David we had a
guest recently who is a roboticist
describing a collaboration with NASA
about a the search for life in the
subsurface of Enceladus we know
Enceladus has these these striking
plumes that we can see sort of in those
side views when it's properly lit by the
sun you see these sort of geysers coming
out so he's working with Folks at Nasa
to make a worm a robotic worm that'll go
down that hole and then look around for
life with because it's frozen on the top
and then you have sort of liquid water
we presume below so do you know about
that and do they need your permission or
do they need your blessing or do they
need a fishing
license I mecker right he's got got
license no I mean yeah we put we
certainly uh put some resources into
these um experimental and speculative
engineering projects that could someday
lead to a um a a new way a new kind of
Mission to search for life in a place
like Enceladus that's not just a Lander
and you know the usual right that's not
a current you know Mission that's in our
plan like we're definitely going to do
this but part of our strategy is to
support people with Innovative Concepts
that could lead to Future missions and
certainly Enceladus is one of the places
that's very high on our list of places
that we would like to visit and
characterize for habitability and
perhaps search for life for the reasons
that you mentioned Neil it seems like a
place not only is there liquid water in
the interior but the hints we have about
that ocean based on what we've seen in
that plume suggests that the chemistry
of that interior ocean may be really
conducive to life it may have the right
mix of chemicals to have sources of
energy and the the biogenic elements you
know the right elements to make life so
we have some hints that not only is
there an ocean on Enceladus but it might
have the good stuff so it's definitely
high on our list of places that we
intend to explore you know what I never
asked you guys and this for both of you
um a very icy crust frozen over right
and then underneath a liquid ocean so
what is making it so warm underneath
that we can have a liquid ocean but
clearly um it's like not in some
goldilock Zone because the outside is a
frozen crust yeah well you know it's
been a big surprise of Planetary
Exploration that so many of these moons
of the outer solar system have these
warm active Interiors we didn't expect
that maybe we should have if we were
smarter you know because the physics
works
but we thought they would before we sent
spacecraft to Jupiter and Saturn we
thought they'd just be these greater
dead ice balls but it turns out that
being near these giant planets the way
the moons interact with each other uh
flexes their Interiors basically by
Tides the Interiors are getting squished
um and that makes certainly a place like
uh Europa keeps the interior warm and
keeps you know pumping heat from
basically the gravitational influence of
those giant planets there's also any
place with a rocky core and all these
moons have rocky cores have some sources
of just natural heat from radioactivity
in the Rock so it's some combination of
natural radioactivity and the tidal
history of these moons that have like
warmed their
Interiors so so I remember Enceladus I'm
not entirely Moon fluent but Enceladus
if memory serves orbits Saturn correct
that is correct okay yeah
last last I checked yeah he was like uh
I'm just giving you that one Neil I
don't have to sorry I thought you were
just pausing for dramatic effect when
Neil degrass Tyson says and solidus
orbits Saturn correct I'm going to think
that that's rhetorical and just shut up
that's I was going with that Jupiter has
no shortage of moons it's got tily
heated moons it's got moons with ice on
it everybody's favorite Europa right and
Jupiter is only half the distance out
there compared with Saturn so why would
Saturn moons have any priority at all
relative to Jupiter's moons
Cassini at Saturn which was the you know
the Orbiter that really brought those
moons to us turned up some really
surprising things and probably the
biggest surprise that was that Enceladus
is so weird and it's weird in enticing
ways that that it seems some people
think it's the best candidate for
finding extent life some people think
it's even a better candidate than Europa
now I don't want to get into that fight
but we're going to Europa with the
Clipper Mission and which is great
because Europa is a very promising place
to look but what's amazing about
Enceladus is as you mentioned it has
these geysers so it's literally you know
like uh shooting its guts out into into
space and there is stuff from that ocean
landing on the surface some people think
we can go to Enceladus and just scoop up
Snow from the surface and look for
organisms in the snow and never have to
go down into the liquid right it's it's
the ocean is so accessible because it's
literally squirting out into space so
what this I heard you know some of the
chemistry like hydrogen cyanide is that
right is it hcn or something yeah yeah
which sounds like oh that's poison but
actually it's a very and you're thinking
about the origin of life and and what
primitive life may need it's a very
juicy chemical because whenever you've
got nitrogen bound up in a carbon
molecule that's you know the basis of so
much that's the basis of amino acids and
all this stuff so so hydrogen cyanide is
actually a very promising sign if you're
looking for a life somewhere but just to
be clear it will kill you if you ingest
it you're talking about the formation of
life just just to be clear yes yes no
don't don't try this at home but it
giveth and it taketh away there you go
Chuck so it's hydrogen C is I think
that's the gas and gas Chambers or some
variant on that uh but you're saying if
car hydr hcn the C and the N together is
what really that's what's fertile for
organic chemistry that's that's enticing
that's because we know you know one
thing we've learned is that there's
carbon molecules everywhere in the I
mean many places in the universe which
is encouraging for astrobiology that
it's not hard to you know the universe
likes to make carbon molecules which is
great but you need certain things beyond
that and carbon bonded with nitrogen is
very key to all the biochemistry we know
so when you see that in a natural
environment you go hey that's you know
that's encouraging all right so this is
this is what's attracting people all
right we got interesting this is a
cosmic queries episode and Chuck has
collected them so David you may remember
in our Cosmic queries we we tell people
you're going to be on they're reminded
of your expertise and they come in with
their
questions that are inspired by the the
the Curiosity that your work
so uh let's see what you got Chuck okay
we got it uh let's start off with Brad
Lester uh Brad Lester says hello Dr
Tyson Dr grinspoon and Mr Nice didn't
get the memo on the Lord part did you
there Brad
okay Chuck these are paying customers oh
that's right that's right nice to them
by the way thank you all for uh
supporting us on patreon we certainly
appreciate you and uh and we appreciate
you just even more than we appreciate
your money just letting you know that
okay and just to be clear that if they
call you Mr Nice they must they must be
new members because they don't know the
history that's true that's true being
called so be nice to the new folk I will
be nice to that's right because he's new
too so we got a super super nice so I've
heard scientists speak about how
unlikely it is for intelligent life to
evolve into a humanoid form on other
planets that being said has any study
been devoted to the likelihood of other
exoplanets that might contain trees or
other plants or structures comparable to
trees if tree like Flora existing
elsewhere in the universe is reasonably
likely and if we assume s sentient life
could also evolve on these planets it is
it is it reasonable to conclude that
some organisms would evolve to have
limbs hands fingers or similar
appendages to allow them to spread to
the tree heavy environment maybe I'm
mistaken but isn't that the reason why
primates evolved in the first place and
thus why humans contain two arms and two
legs and
in which to grab things so you know damn
D that's not where I thought he was
going with that I thought he was I
thought can we have senent trees like
they have in of the Rings that's such a
good question you should get this guy to
be your next guest on the
show no I mean it's like what he's
asking about is I something that we call
convergent evolution like you know on
the one hand we know evolution is full
of accident and contingency and you know
like uh step J G used to say if you ran
the tape again you wouldn't get the same
biosphere because there's so much
Randomness why would you expect anything
to be the same since evolution is so
random but but the opposite of that is
that there are certain things you can
see on Earth that evolved similarly in
different environments multiple times
because they make sense they solve a
problem and and evolution is all about
solving problems right and so we do
expect on other planets probably
photosynth is evolves like the ability
to use sunlight because what is there
all over the universe there's stars in
any environment with you know that's a
great source of energy so if you have
photosynthesis you're G to have some
organism that spreads out and has
something like leaves so it can capture
that and then it's going to have
something like branches because that's
sort of a natural you know so you can
make these arguments yeah there would be
things that are like trees and similarly
you can say well there's not going to be
a humanoid because that would be
unlikely why would you expect aliens to
look just like us but then you go
through some of our characteristics like
a head makes sense to have one central
processing system for the brain and two
eyes make sense to have you know stereo
vision and yeah like your uh your
questioner astutely said something to
grasp and swing from tree branches so
you know I would not expect humanoids
like we're going to mistake them it's
say oh wow that you know are they from
Earth I think nothing's going to be that
similar but right but some
characteristics in common um there's
rationale for that and one of the
fascinating things if we ever when we if
we ever get to meet complex aliens
That's How we'll answer this question
you know not by speculating but by like
finding out what they're like and and i'
say by by the way you don't have to
actually uh I mean you can uh you don't
have to
necessarily uh evolve hands and instead
of Limbs you could just evolve tentacles
right right right but but David when I
think of convergence I wouldn't be so
specific as you've been I would just say
um there's
convergent uh a convergent evolution
that enable organisms to sense things at
a distance for us it's sight uh and
there's other ver versions of sight
right so uh insects can see but they
don't have a retina eyeball situation
they can see for sure right and then
lotion you don't have to talk about legs
or arms but can you move trees can't
move okay not at least I mean the ones
in The Wizard of Oz I think chased
Dorothy down the street but I
think and they threw threw their apples
threw their apples at her so yeah so you
have Locomotion and in that need and
that valuation of that talent you have
snakes with no arms and no legs at all
yet they move along just fine so when I
think just come to it from the world of
physics I I I'm I'm not I don't have the
urge to be so specific about what it is
so much as what it accomplishes yeah no
absolutely I mean it's a fascinating
question you're right it's it's it's all
about the needs being met because that's
what evolution does and there are some
cases on Earth though of very specific
things like like eyes evolve more than
once yes you know and you can say that's
all on the same planet with the same
condition so who knows I mean I think we
can speculate but this is what I love
about astrobiology and exploration is
that that's how we'll find the answers
is we're going out there and seeing a
Chuck give me some more this is Tom
lelus from Sweden he says greetings from
Sweden or did he say greetings from
Sweden okay
uh yes Chuck thank you for
interpreting and right after that he
says Bey be or bey bey be Bey uh was
that what he said right after that
anyway he says we already know that
Neil's favorite alien movie is The
Blob but what is your favorite alien
movie Dr Funky spoon and what do you
think the first
encounter actually bigger than
microbes might look like when we
encounter aliens let me just clarify
that's my favorite it's not my favorite
alien movie it's my favorite alien right
just to be just to be clear because it
it has no bones no skin no mouth eyes
teeth hair fingers it's it is I think
it's the most creative alien ever put on
the screen because it looks nothing like
any other life form on Earth and if
you're going to come visit from another
planet and you look more like humans
than either humans or you look like
anything else on Earth you're not being
creative in Hollywood right so yeah so I
want to know too David what's your
favorite so so I mean I have to give you
two answers if that's okay because in
terms of favorite I'm old school with
the favorite movie to me it all goes
back to 2001 and and part of that is
because as Neil says you know you if you
show the
aliens they're going to look cheesy no
matter what and in 2001 they did the
brilliant thing of implying them without
really showing them uh in this pretty
mind-blowing way by the way I'm told and
you might have some other Insight here
that Carl Sean at the time though young
advised the producers of that film to
not show the aliens and leave it to your
imagination and that fact was preserved
in his novel contact when that the
screen version at least you don't see
the aliens at all yeah no that's AB so
that became way to think about that's
absolutely right I think you know uh
rumor has it or the story is that that
Sean and kubri didn't really get along
that well and Carl didn't have that much
input into that film but his one
substantive piece of advice that was
followed was don't show the aliens
because in some earlier drafts they were
going to try to but it's always a
brilliant storytelling Ploy is is to
leave things to the imagin when you
think about Jaws you don't see the shark
until how long into the movie right
right and and again you're right you're
right Neil that's that was what they did
in in contact to brilliant effect um the
the one depiction that's coming to mind
of an alien organism in a movie that I
think is pretty good is in arrival um
you know where they have those seid oh
the septs is that true I
didn't I just saw it a few days ago
count awesome awesome I like that odd an
odd number is is good too but um but you
know and they're kind of floating there
and behind this frosted glass in their
own atmosphere and you can sort of see
them but to me there's nothing about
them that seems like fake or or
implausible I'm like yeah that looks
like an alien so I I give them high I
give high points High marks yeah but you
miss the ray guns and stuff like that
you know yeah
yeah well so yet you said you had two
movies so the arrival by the way there's
another movie The Arrival with Charlie
Sheen in it playing an astrophysicist
yes so you're talking about the more
recent one where they have the the as
yeah the physicist and the linguist to
decode Amy Adams Amy Adams yes yes yes
so that's the more recent one from a few
years ago so what's the other film
you're the Charlie scene one by the way
is is underrated let me just say that
Charlie Sheen one it's pretty cool
because it's about climate change oh
okay I'll go back and check it out yeah
all right go ahead no the other one I I
already mentioned 2001 I said that's my
sort of foundational one where that's
you know I like the aliens because you
don't see
them nice this is uh Ivan or Ivon duza
who says hello doctors and Lord
greetings from Abu Dhabi United Arab
Emirates longtime fan and recent patreon
member well thank you uh my question is
about Jupiter's moon Europa I can't help
but wonder what life may possibly find
in that vast ocean that insulates its
icy surface yes I am ruling out
impossibility because I really want to
be there what do you think we will find
and in what form please do visit the
side of the world uh this side of the
world would love to take y'all around
okay there you
go love open standing invitations if if
that existed more frequently in the
World Imagine how how much more at peace
we would be because there's an
invitation awaiting you right not a wall
preventing you it's just a very very
kind Forward Thinking gesture we're
gonna put a door in the wall there's a
door yeah no I love that and I love the
fact that these kinds of questions make
it so obvious that we're all we're all
on the same side when we're thinking of
what's out there you know so that that's
great what's your best what's the best
thinking about Europa because that's
that gets everybody's imagination for
sure like Europa was in uh 2010 the
sequel to
2001 and Europa shown up in several
storytelling uh efforts there's another
one called the Europa
Report which is a film so lower budget
sci-fi film I know about that because
I'm in it oh get out
interesting short Cameo where and it was
simple because they just clipped
something from when I was on CNN and the
clip was I can't wait to go ice fishing
on Europa cut a hole in the ice put a
camera lens down there and see if
anything swims up and licks it I think
that that was my entire quote I love it
licks licks the camera could you imagine
the giant europan tongue like
what yeah Europa is one of those places
that's just been in our imagination for
a long time and actually so I I have a
cameo too in the um in episode six of
the original um Cosmos with Carl Sean um
Travelers Tales they show the scene in
um at JPL when Voyager 2 showed the
first close-ups of Europa that had ever
been seen by a spacecraft somehow Carl
convinced the you know them to let a
camera crew in the room while while this
was happening and I'm actually an
undergraduate intern in a skinny kid
with a giant afro holding a clipboard in
the very back of that scene on screen
for like three
frames um did your mom have a poster of
that you know with with a circle and an
arrow of course of course yeah but so
Europa you know and that was 1979 summer
of 1979 and that was the you know Europa
came to our attention as like a really
weird world but just to be clear Cosmos
was released in 1980 so it was filmed
that moment took place in 1979 yeah and
that you know we saw with voyager uh a
moon with with no visible craters on the
surface so that tells you it's young
there's that hasn't been sitting there
getting hit and these weird lines turned
out you know cross which turned out to
be cracks in a thin ice shell with an
ocean of liquid water and the more we've
learned about that it seems the ocean
probably has probably the right kinds of
chemicals to support some kind of
metabolism and you know it's more and
more encouraging to imagine some life
form there and what's really cool is
that we're going back there um I have to
interrupt you again Chuck uh he said a
thin coat of ice but let's get him to
quantify that by Thin I mean maybe by
maybe between 10 and 100 kilometers
oh little thin
little okay this is not this is not you
know dangerous ice to go ice skating no
you would you would not fall
through um just to be clear I'm just
trying to truth and advertising here
thin ice out of David's mouth this is a
this is a object a world about the size
of our moon so if it's just got 10
kilometers of ice over a deep ocean
that's it's might be it's probably our
Solar System's largest ocean of liquid
water and more water than on Earth so
it's it's impressive in that way as far
as we know life on Earth began in our
oceans absolutely I mean it must have
begun in water and either oceans or a
pond or you know we think maybe a hot
spring at the bottom of the ocean which
actually that's really interesting
because they probably are hot spring you
know or like these these uh vents C4
vents at the bottom of europa's ocean we
think fed by that tidal energy we were
talking about earlier so so we're
sending a spacecraft back there if all
goes well launching later this year
called Europa Clipper which is going to
orbit Jupiter and make lots of close
passes of Europa to examine this
question of habitability
and to look at things like are there
pockets of water in the ice shell itself
which would be one place you could have
life if there are because then you have
chemicals coming in from the surface and
chemicals coming up from the from the
ocean below that are kind of mixing so
that's one place you could have in the I
sh itself NASA astrobiology strategist
why go back to Jupiter and just keep
orbiting isn't it a high time we'd land
it on your
what what is what is the delay so
there's a couple of things um we can
only do what we can do it's very uh
difficult to at one point we wanted to
maybe orbit Europa rather than orbit
Jupiter dude we landed on Saturn's moon
Titan come on now don't tell me you
can't land on Jupiter's moon Europa but
but hyans wasn't even it was supposed to
touch down and then die right and it it
lasts for 45 minutes on the Sur
we don't want to do that on Europa If
eventually by the way we do want to send
a Lander to Europa but with the budget
that we had it was decided that we what
we want to do first is characterize
Europa much more carefully for one thing
you want to know where to land you want
to know if it's safe and you want to
pick the right spot you can't do that
without surveying more than we've done
100 kilometers thick you're not falling
through you're not falling through but
you don't want to land in the wrong spot
and be like oh if only we had been over
there that's where the interesting stuff
is a lot of people don't know because
you know the Apollo program was was so
visible there was an entire uh lunar uh
Ranger was it the Ranger series that
photographed the entire surface of the
Moon to enable people to study it and
figure out where the best landing sites
would be right right that was all the
homework we did before the famous words
were spoken and and the other thing
that's interesting is you might say well
so why aren't we just going to orbit
Europa rather than orbit Jupiter and
make lots of passes by Europa because
and there there have been Europa
orbiters studied but the problem is
Jupiter's radiation field is so intense
that if you're at the distance of if
you're at europa's distance from Jupiter
that's pretty close in to Jupiter you
would get fried and I don't just mean
you I mean our Electronics don't survive
very long with that intense radiation so
what you do is you orbit Jupiter you
spend time farther out when you're doing
things like sending the images back to
Earth and doing other things and then
you make these quick close passes by
Europa where you dash through the
radiation and then you Retreat to safety
and if you do that enough time you can
build up these really detailed maps of
all the different qualities we want to
study of Europa the images the Spectra
the gravity data the radar data that's
going to tell us of what's underneath
the ice the the radio data is going to
tell us if that is ocean is salty by
looking at the conductivity but we do it
quickly on these close passes and then
you Retreat you sure you can't just wrap
the vessel in one of those blankets that
my dentist
wears and just
land well believe it or not we're doing
that with this thing even even with what
I said radiation Harden biggest danger
is radiation we have all these radiation
hardened components and it's in a vault
it's in something that's literally
called the vault which is this radiation
hardened container where all the
electronics are even with all that you
still get way too much of a dose wow so
this reminds me of the the monster
movies from Japan in the 1950s and 60s I
think many of them if not all of them uh
they got that way because of radiation
yeah from and of course let's not soon
forget that Japan is the only country to
ever have nuclear weapons used against
them right so the idea that radiation
would create some next World Order with
these giant monsters so that is
Cinematic evidence that Godzilla is in
Europa there you go well it's funny
though because um you know so you think
of radiation is just going to like
destroy everything so there's going to
be no life on Europa but of course
underneath the uh the ice shell the
ocean is shielded from that radiation
and not only that radiation is
interacting with the surface of the ice
in ways that can actually make Europa
more habitable because when that
radiation hits the you know the H2O ice
it knocks off hydrogens and leaves
behind some oxygen and Ox oxidized
compounds in that ice which then can
make their way over time into the ocean
and so that could be a source of energy
in the ocean that's coming indirectly
from that radiation so just like
Godzilla on Earth europens may be fueled
by radiation in some indirect way wow
you ever wanted one of your questions on
the universe answered we all have
questions about the universe black holes
to quazars quantum entanglement
wormholes there is no end to the depths
of cosmic curiosity well the entry level
of patreon membership with Star Talk
gets you just that I think it starts it
$5 a month you have access to the
question line that reaches our Cosmic
query programing and not only that we
produce a special Cosmic
queries installment just for patreon
members if you weren't the director of
the Hayden planetarium what do you think
you would be doing what okay but this
had to be another Universe it wouldn't
happen in this universe okay I'd be I'd
be a a songwriter for Broadway musicals
oh so that's the entry level and the
perks ascend from there uh there's a
level in fact where we send you a an
autographed copy of one of my latest
books uh right now it's Star Messenger
Cosmic perspectives on civilization and
it's signed with my fancy fountain pen
with purple ink so I invite you to just
check the link below and all of that
money goes to our ability to EXP
experiment with new ways of bringing the
universe down to earth so thank you for
those who have already joined and we
welcome others who participate in this
Grand Adventure of what it is to bring
the universe down to earth as always
keep looking up Chuck only a few more
minutes here let's let's see if we can
tighten up these answers this is ma
lambin who says question um if you Neil
Chuck David could have one definitive
understanding of anything from Life on
another planet what would you like to
understand most oh look at that I only
get one we only get one okay I got one I
want to know how they encode information
I want to know how they create a a
global technological civilization that
uh survives long term it survives itself
that assumes they intelligent the
question didn't require that right right
right right I think I think between Neil
and I would like kind of covered the
gam well no you guys miss what I what I
want to know uh do you have
weapons that's that's what I want to
know and are they better than guns
because if they're better than guns then
you we're not contacting
you uh this is Patrick uh weglinski and
Patrick weglinski says hello Dr Grom Dr
grinspoon Dr Tyson Lord nice this is
Patrick from Salt Lake City Utah what is
your and your colleagues algorithm for
characterizing something that's being
alive I'd imagine that if we found life
far away from our planet that evolved in
a vastly different environment it could
be hard to directly compare it to life
on Earth and therefore make it difficult
to say whether indeed it's life or not
yeah David what what what what's the
biologist Current stand on the
definition of Life the definition of
life has evolved yeah yeah that's right
and and you know this could be a this
could be a long answer but we're keeping
it short because people people still
argue about this and that that it's
another one of these things that we'll
be much more sophisticated about when we
find other life but you know in brief
something that reproduces itself uh and
is evolving by something like darwinian
Evolution okay uh except if you find a
life form that is perfectly suited for
its environment it would never have to
evolve and they would never discover
Evolution because they were just always
the same that doesn't sound like much
fun though
Neil all right Chuck give me another
quick this is David guer David guer says
greetings Dr Tyson Dr Funky spoon Lord
nice David gerer here from Crescent Iowa
has anyone updated the estimate of the
number of active extraterrestrial
civilizations postulated by the drink
equation given the enormous amount of
data that is available now I love it
just a quick thing in in in a book I
co-published a few years ago with two
fellow professors we co-taught a course
at Princeton uh it's and it's called
Welcome to the universe we actually give
the latest estimate there of the number
of technologically capable civilizations
in the Galaxy but that was as of maybe
eight years ago so uh so David what is
what would you say is the latest number
if you give the give the Galaxy several
hundred billion stars what you give I
mean you know my my first answer to the
question is people are updating it all
the time because it does it requires a
lot of assumptions of of um parameters
that we we don't know we fundamentally
don't know the answer to and the Drake
equation you know is really meant as a
medium for a discussion of how the
different factors would influence the
answer not as a way to calculate a
definitive answer um and you know as as
we so just to remind people the Drake
equation you start with the number of
stars and you just hack away at it with
fractions what fraction of the stars
have planets what fraction of those
stars with planets have life what
fraction of those that have life have
intelligent life what fraction of those
have life that have intelligent life
have technology this sort of thing and
by the time you hack away with these
fractions there's not much but if you
start with a big enough number there
should be a few left come on now it's
got to be at least one so give me your
number here well we know there's one I
think
unless you consider you know you could
debate whether it's an intelligence
civilization we resend the intelligence
status yeah yes yeah but you know I
there's so many I you know I I hate to
just come up with a number I love to
just like talk about the possibilities
if you asked me to come up with my own
personal number not wearing my NASA hat
but just my Dr Funky spoon David
grinspoon hat I would say um I would say
th a thousand civilizations in the
Galaxy but thousand with a huge error
bar that ranges from zero to a million
you know right so so what fraction of
those civilizations would you suggest
might be considerably more advanced than
we are most of them okay good okay there
it is and and how many of them would
still be around because there's a
possibility that many of them have come
and gone yeah no that's that's an
estimate for the current number if you
want to talk about um all the ones that
have ever been then it's of course going
to be a larger number
although although I tend to think uh and
this is again we we're trying to keep
our answers short I tend to think that
over a certain threshold of success that
they last really that the the longevity
gets huge because you pass this sort of
unstable immature phase that arguably
we're at and if you make it to the point
where you've learned how to be
sustainable then you know enough to not
get wiped out so the longevity you know
they stick around if you get out of your
teenage years
yes you got a damn good chance of making
mature brain sets
in if you make it to adulthood you're
probably gonna be okay right well we're
not quite there yet unfortunately Chuck
we got time for one last question
squeeze this in okay Al righty uh this
is star eyed mama who says greetings
doctors grinspoon Tyson Lord nice if
mathematics is the universal language
what would it look like to be able to
convey a message at communicate with
another intelligent life form can't wait
to watch you live here in Columbus Ohio
this fall Dr Tyson I'm a grateful fan
Maria Gail she already bought tickets
bro that's amazing yeah coming through
Columbus Ohio yeah I I generally don't
give my speaking schedule publicly you
gotta go find it she did you didn't she
did she did give her free give her free
free free patreon pass exactly we going
to get you some P we going to get you
some patreon passes uh
Maria all right so go ahead Dr Funky
spoon yeah well star mama if um if
mathematics is not a universal language
then I feel like we have a much much
harder task in trying to establish any
understanding with other creatures out
there with whom all we share in common
is the same universe of origin so it
seems to me and you know this is an
interesting philosophical question that
mathematics kind of has to be a
universal language because it's seems
sort of built into the universe not
something we've created so much as
something we've discovered if that's
correct then presumably other
intelligences could have should have
discovered the same mathematics and that
creates a basis you know like even you
can think of two-dimensional you know we
have these ways of making
two-dimensional messages just send send
a circle A Perfect Circle then you at
least know this is that's another mind
nothing made that randomly and then once
you've established we're a mind you're
in mind we're trying to communicate then
you can start to get more sophisticated
so to me mathematics is the thing that
gives us hope of being able to establish
that connection with some other circles
are everywhere with large planets and
things I would send a triangle no
natural triangles out there yeah well no
right a circle is is ubiquitous but but
something that is encoding a digital
message that makes a circle that's like
oh got it got it you know the first idea
how to communicate with aliens you know
what that was you surely know this David
was this like making giant triangles of
fire in the Siberian forest or something
exactly no so what you do is you you you
you you create a right triangle as big
as you can on Earth so it's got a right
angle and then the other two angles okay
now do you remember your Pythagorean
theorem Chuck um it's 180 degrees well
those are the sum of the three angles 45
45 and 90 a b and c these are the three
remember right yes a b c c is the
hypoten okay okay so now this is what's
so brilliant okay you make this triangle
as big as you can and it's got to be you
got to be able to ignite it I mean not
blow it up but light it with fire so you
can see it at night on the on the side
of the earth that's not lit right so the
aliens could then see it so that's first
you get a right triangle okay then you
fill out the sides of the triangles with
squares okay so one side of a triangle
is the side of a square so you so you
create squares three squares off the
side of Tri the triangle why would you
do that
because the area of one of the squares
plus the area of the other squares
equals the area of this third Square how
do I know that that's the Pythagorean
theorem a 2 + b 2 = c 2 what's the area
of a square that the one dimension times
the other dimension so it it links like
trigonometry and geometry and it's and
and you get to and Aliens say oh there's
there's intelligence down there right
the aliens say there was Intelligence
down there they're like well uh clearly
they were smart enough to figure out our
gupan
theorem however they were dumb enough to
burn down their whole damn Planet trying
to show it to us
now now wouldn't wouldn't it be cool if
like the first time we get a direct
Imaging picture of an exoplanet with our
super duper Space Telescope that's what
we
see that be amazing the gupan would
be the gupan theorem that's that's a
good one Chuck we gotta keep
that so David we got to call it quits
here remind remind us of the book that
you wrote about Pluto a few years back
what's that title again oh yeah chasing
New Horizons with Alan stern oh both of
you together on that excellent and and
the subtitle was oh oh gosh you want to
remember the subtitle it was no in
inside chasing New Horizons inside the
Epic first mission to Pluto okay that's
the only mission to Pluto just just stop
trying to number them before their
number so
far and we find you on and you also like
you're a musician that like Dr Funk
spoon is your that's your your moniker
your musical mon yeah you can find me on
YouTube and you know the the usual the
usual channels and I think in our
archives we have you playing the the
guitar that's right we did we did we did
the astrobiology Blues the CH the Chuck
and I wrote together yeah that's in
there oh it's in our archives dig that
one up all good all right Chuck good to
have you man always a pleasure all right
uh Neil theg grass Tyson yet another
installment of cosmic queries this one
with the one and only Dr Funky spoon
we'll see you next time as always keep
looking up
[Music]